# Polynomials

Polynomials are the class of functions generated by adding, subtracting, and multiplying numbers and (powers of) a variable $$x$$.

We've already been discussing some examples of polynomials.  It's typical to categorize polynomials by their *degree*.

|--------|------------|
| Degree | Polynomial |
|:------:|:----------:|
|   0    |     $$c$$     |
|   1    |   $$mx + b$$   |
|   2    | $$ax^2 + bx + c$$ |
|   3    | $$a_3 x^3 + a_2 x^2 + a_1 x + a_0$$ |
| $$\vdots$$ | $$\vdots$$ |
| $$n$$  | $$a_n x^n + a_{n-1} x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1 x + a_0$$ |
|--------|------------|

In this table, all of the non-$$x$$ letters (like $$c, m, a_0, a_1, ...$$) are taken to be some fixed constants.  These constants are called the *coefficients* of the polynomial.

polynomial
: A **polynomial** is any function of the form $$a_n x^n + a_{n-1} x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1 x + a_0$$, where $$a_0, a_1, ..., a_n$$ are constants and $$n$$ is a non-negative integer.

degree
: The **degree** of a polynomial is the highest power of $$x$$ that occurs in the polynomial.

For example, the quadratics that we saw in the last section are the degree 2 polynomials.  Something like $$y = 2x - 3$$ is a degree 1 polynomial, because it can be thought of as $$2x^1 - 3x^0$$.  Similarly, $$y = 7$$ (a constant function) is a degree 0 polynomial, since it can be written $$7x^0$$ (recall that $$x^0 = 1$$).

As in the previous section, we're going to be focused on some ways that we can write a polynomial function.

|--------------|---------------|
| General Form | Factored Form |
|:------------:|:-------------:|
| $$a_n x^n + a_{n-1} x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1 x + a_0$$ | $$a_n (x - r_1)(x - r_2)\cdots (x - r_n)$$ |
|--------------|---------------|

The left form is useful for determining what the "end behavior" of the graph looks like - where $$x$$ is a large positive or negative number.  The right form is more useful for determining the "inside" portion of the graph, because $$r_1, ..., r_n$$ are the *roots* of the polynomial.  Roots correspond to $$x$$-intercepts on the graph.

## Determining End Behavior (The Leading Coefficient Test) {#end-behavior}

First, we're going to focus on determining what the edges of a polynomial's graph should look like.  We'll learn how to determine the interior behavior of the graph later.

We saw in the last section that $$ax^2 + bx + c$$ "opens up" if $$a$$ is positive, and it "opens down" if $$a$$ is negative.  More generally, polynomials with an even degree will either "open up" or "open down", depending on the positivity or negativity of their *leading coefficient*.

leading coefficient
: The **leading coefficient** of a polynomial is the coefficient of its highest-degree term.

For example, the coefficients of the terms in $$-x^4 + 2x^2 + 7$$ are -1, 2, and 7.  The leading coefficient would be -1, because that's the coefficient on the term with the highest power of $$x$$.  This polynomial would open down on the edges of the graph by the Leading Coefficient Test.

### The Leading Coefficient Test

Coming Soon!  See your lecture notes/videos for help with this topic.

---

[Return to Previous Section](1-3-quadratic-functions.html)

[Continue to Next Section](1-5-rational-functions.html)

[Return to Table of Contents](index.html)